You guys all come back to the course in this lecture we're going to talk about a strategy called adding
keywords or what we call Chirs into your project descriptions and into your specifications.
Now right off the bat I just kind of made up the word when I say Chirs I use this quite frequently.
So it's much easier just to call it something.
So that's kind of the nickname I've given it.
It doesn't necessarily have to be key words but it could be key phrases are key questions.
Now what are the biggest problems that you'll have when you're going over a list of people and you're
trying to determine who you should give the project to is that you have a mass of people that may or
may not have written a template response and you don't know if they've read read the entirety of the
project description.
That's obviously a problem because you don't want them to be bidding on something that they haven't
actually thought about.
You also don't want them to be signing up saying they can do something if they haven't tried and actually
comprehended every section of what needs to be done that's obviously going to set you up for problems
down the road.
A lot of times freelancers bid on 10 projects not realizing that they can't actually fulfill four of
them.
Similarly a lot of times freelancers just bid based on what other people say and if they ever win the
project then what ends up happening is they either try to renegotiate the price or they might quit halfway.
So that's a risk you want to avoid.
So to get around that what you can do is you can add to your questions and they're very similar to like
screener questions that we saw an up work on uptick we saw that they asked a question up front and the
person has to answer to even bid.
But this is actually going a little bit farther than that.
So a key question is when you add a question or you add some kind of key instruction inside of the project
description that only someone who read the project description would actually be able to see.
So to give you an example you might say in your project description you know in your bid please say
this phrase.
That's a common one I've seen what they're basically trying to do is very quickly identify who has read
and who has not.
Now we don't use that technique because freelancers and freelance firms they can see each other's bids.
And so if they put that at the top of their message ends up happening is if a lot of people seeing that
and posting it and it's also gotten to a point where that technique has become so popular that groups
actually kind of anticipate that so they'll look into other people's bids to see if they can steal that.
So I'm going to give you some strategies for adding in key questions adding in these little snippets
that basically test to see whether or not the freelancer has read the entire description.
My favorite technique is probably the simplest what I want you to do is basically take your project
and divide it out into sections.
So it's pretty easy honestly if you have a description in your ascriptions two pages long just figure
out where you're shifting from one side of your application or one side of your work and just divide
it out put a section to it and then what you want to do is put every single section ask a question and
ask them to say Give me an estimate for how long they'll take to get this section done.
Now traditionally what you do is you put one big project description and then you ask them to give you
an estimate based on that.
But what you can do is just cut in half thirds or fourths and say Give me an estimate for each section.
Now if the person is paying attention they should be able to do this very very easily.
It shouldn't be that hard.
Some of them might struggle with it a little bit because sections can be interrelated but you just want
to make sure that they at least give it an attempt towards it.
And as we talk about in a separate lecture it's always a good idea to ask for a time not money don't
say estimate the cost of a section.
Ask them how many hours it will take and we'll explain later in the course why that's important.
Another option what you can do is at the very beginning of your project description or within your specification
sheet ask them to give you two pieces of information.
So essentially what you're doing is emulating the screener questions that we saw in up work and then
kind of inputting that into your project description itself.
So what you could do is you could just ask them say show me a portfolio item that is similar to this
project tell me what your availability is something that is maybe specific maybe generic but it's something
that if they don't respond with that information you know that they're not someone who's has like strong
attention to detail and they clearly might have glossed over your project description.
Another strategy is within your project description if you have a section that might be a little bit
more difficult or could be done in multiple ways what you can do is you can say to the freelancer in
the project description how would you address this.
How would you build this.
What thoughts do you have on this.
And then what you can do is that you can look through the project easels and see who exactly actually
answered the question and this is helpful because it's also a test to see how thoughtful and how experienced
they are thoughtful people will actually give you multiple options or they'll just straight up tell
you I'm not entirely sure but when I do do the project I'll research it and I'm confident I'd find an
answer.
That's a perfectly acceptable answer because you have to understand these people are bidding on lots
of projects.
They don't want to waste their time doing the research up front for a project they're not going to get.
Of course that does have mixed results obviously don't pick a PR technique that is too obscure or too
time intensive because it might be the case that no one does it.
That didn't exactly help you then.
So if you're doing a big project and people are going to spend more time up front in their proposals
you can try that technique.
This is a short project low budget probably not worth doing.
The last technique I like to use is a very generic easy one what you can do at the very end of your
project description is just ask them and say What do you think of the project that is it all that does
is it ask them to step back a little bit not speak specifically about what they're building but actually
give you a thought about it.
Now do not expect that answer to be poetic.
Don't exactly expect an answer that you would hear from a co-founder or a business partner or even like
a consultant.
There's a good chance that they'll just say there that whatever your idea is it's great.
And obviously because they don't want insult you or make it sound like they're not interested in the
project but a lot of times you can tell if people do have genuine interest.
The point here is again just a test of whether or not they're thinking about it whether or not they've
read that and then to get some kind of an idea of how articulate how dynamic and again how thoughtful
they are.
So those are good techniques for putting in career questions and remember key questions are the little
snippets little Easter eggs you hide to see who exactly read your description.
It's really helpful because then when you just glance over all your projects you can very easily figure
out the ones you did not answer your question correctly didn't see it and you can remove them from the
list.
That way you can start whittling it down from say you know 40 people down to eight or nine or something
like that something where it's now manageable.
All right guys try out these techniques and your own projects if you have some other suggestions for
what's worked for you post in the group discussion otherwise I'll see you in the next lecture.